>>WILLIAM HENRY: Jan
van Eyck's painting
"The Mystic Lamb" is
considered the most highly
coveted painting of all time.
Why?
>>CLARE HENRY:
Today on "Arcanum,"
the secrets of
"The Mystic Lamb."
[THEME MUSIC]
>>WILLIAM: During World War II,
an unlikely team of soldiers
was charged with
identifying and protecting
European cultural sites,
monuments, and buildings
from the bombing of Europe.
>>CLARE: Officially named
the Monuments, Fine Arts,
and Archives section,
this US Army unit
included art curators, scholars,
architects, librarians,
and archivists from
the US and Britain.
They quickly became known
as the Monuments Men.
>>WILLIAM: Towards the end of
the war, their mission changed
to one of locating
and recovering
works of art that had
been looted by the Nazis.
>>CLARE: In 2014,
the Monuments Men
became the subject of
a hit movie starring
George Clooney and Matt Damon.
>>WILLIAM: The Monuments
Men uncovered thousands
of pieces of stolen art hidden
across Germany and Austria--
some in castles,
others in salt mines.
>>CLARE: They rescued some
of history's greatest works
of art.
They include works by Sandro
Botticelli, Auguste Rodin,
and Paul Cezanne.
>>WILLIAM: Hitler had plans to
create a super-museum in Linz,
Germany, his home, to
display the art plundered
from Europe by the Nazis.
>>CLARE: We are lucky,
though, we have these works
today as Hitler had
given orders to blow up
all of the works instead of
losing them to the Allies.
>>WILLIAM: We were very close
to losing these works of art.
Hitler believed that if
he destroyed this art,
it would erase the
culture of his enemies.
>>CLARE: Hundreds of
thousands of works
of art, cultural
objects, and documents
are still missing
since World War II.
The Dallas-based
Monuments Men Foundation
for the Preservation
of Art is working
with individuals
who came forward
with leads about
missing cultural items
or the actual objects, and
will enable the foundation
to facilitate their return
to the rightful owner.
>>WILLIAM: Among the
paintings the Monuments Men
recovered is arguably the single
most influential painting ever
made.
It's also considered the
world's most coveted painting,
having been stolen seven
times during its history.
>>CLARE: Known as the
"Adoration of the Mystic Lamb,"
this incredible piece of art
had been stolen by the Nazis
at the start of the
Second World War.
It was ordered seized
by Hitler in 1942.
"The Mystic Lamb" was stored
in a salt mine in Austria
along with thousands of
other looted works of art.
Hitler believed that
"The Mystic Lamb"
contained a coded message.
>>WILLIAM: Perhaps a
map leading to what
may be the most powerful lost
artifact of human history.
>>CLARE: What is that relic?
Better yet, where is it?
This is the subject of
William's feature investigation.
>>WILLIAM: In 2006, I was in
the Philadelphia Museum of Art.
I had spent considerable time
in the city, as well as DC,
researching the
Founding Fathers.
And while in the
Philadelphia Art Museum,
I was wandering around
the Renaissance section,
and I came to this
extraordinary painting.
And I was absolutely
mesmerized by it.
I didn't know why.
I suppose it had to do with
this image here of Jesus
as a butterfly angel.
I had never seen such an
image of Jesus before,
and I just stood there
kind of stunned, wondering,
who is this artist?
And why is he portraying
Jesus as a butterfly
angel, a winged angel?
This moment prompted
me to begin to pull
on the golden thread
of this painting,
and I realized that the
artist was Jan van Eyck, who
I'll talk about throughout
our episode today.
And what he was doing
here was actually
showing the stigmatization of
Saint Francis of Assisi, who
in a vision saw Jesus manifest
not as a butterfly angel, as I
had described him, but actually
as a seraphim, the highest
order of angels.
In fact, what Van Eyck was
expressing here, in part,
was the Renaissance belief
that the highest aspiration
of humans was to
become seraphim angels.
This was the stated
ideal of Marsilio Ficino,
the great mastermind behind
Sandro Botticelli and so many
other great Renaissance masters.
They believed that humans had
it within their capability
to transform into the seraphim
angels, beings of pure light
and pure love, and
that in fact this
is how Jesus manifested
on the Earth plane
after the Resurrection.
Well, if that was
not enough, I mean,
Van Eyck had so much
more waiting for me
than the recognition
that the seraphim are
part of our earthly
ideal and that we all
have it within us to become
these magnificent angelic
beings.
As I began researching
Van Eyck, I soon
learned that he was thought of
as a secret agent, a genius,
certainly a mystic.
He was an alchemist and,
absolutely, a painter.
This is his self-portrait.
Just take a look in those eyes.
Think about the insight
and the reflection
that this man must
have possessed
in order to do what he did.
Because as I'm going
to show you here,
Jan van Eyck was one of the
most powerful mystics of Arcanum
who ever walked the Earth.
One of my favorite
Van Eyck paintings
is "The Last Judgment."
It's int he Metropolitan
Museum of Art in New York City.
Today it's two
paintings side by side,
but it's thought to
have been a triptych.
And my mind can only imagine
what that third painting
must have contained.
Here in the painting,
we see Jesus
manifesting the
rainbow body of light.
And I encourage people when they
see this painting, like others,
to mirror what they
are seeing here.
If you want to reflect the
light that Christ is manifesting
in this painting
by Van Eyck, hands
up, mirrors to your
screen, and reflect
or mirror what
Jesus is doing here.
And see if you
can tap in or tune
in to the vibrancy and the light
that is radiating from Jesus
in this extraordinary
painting, the rainbow
aura, the light illuminating
or manifesting from his hands.
Van Eyck clearly had
an extraordinary eye
and an insight into the
Resurrection of Jesus
Look at the Archangel
Michael here,
the detail of Michael
as the peacock angel.
How was it that Van
Eyck was able to achieve
such extraordinary detail?
Ah, now there's
the key question.
And the answer is
that Jan Van Eyck
is, according to legend, the
man who invented oil painting.
That forever changed
painting as we know it,
and that is how he
was able to achieve
such extraordinary detail.
His "Annunciation,"
which is in the National
Gallery in Washington, DC,
is another of my favorites.
At the top of the painting is
a dove radiating seven rays
as it descends into the
open crown chakra of Mary.
Again, detail
unavailable previous
to Van Eyck's advancement
with oil painting.
And here we see
the dove descending
on the beam of light, going
into Mary's open crown chakra,
as indicated by the jewel
on the top of her head.
But the painting, the world's
most mystic painting--
in fact, the most coveted
painting, we're told,
in all of art history-- is
Jan Van Eyck's painting,
"The Mystic Lamb," also featured
as part of the Ghent Altar
piece.
And that is the subject of
our investigation today.
Artists and art
historians marvel, again,
at the level of detail that
Van Eyck was able to achieve.
The work itself is massive.
It's almost 12 feet tall.
It was made for a private
chapel in St. Bavo
Cathedral in Ghent, Belgium.
Van Eyck is
mythically, as I said,
credited with the
invention of oil painting.
This invention or innovation
ignited the imagination
of artists and allowed them to
capture detail as never before.
You can make out details in
the hair of John the Baptist
and the radiant light
coming off of his body,
even going into the
fabric behind him.
It's absolutely extraordinary.
We see God the Father--
or, some believe,
Christ-- on the throne,
holding the staff of Arcanum.
On the right, John the
Baptist, holding the open book.
Mary, reading another
book on the left side.
The title of these
books-- undoubtedly
Arcanum, absolutely.
Look at the jewel on the
chest here of God the Father,
or Christ.
The detail is just
absolutely amazing,
as is that on his
ornamented headpiece here.
Just breathtaking
to all who stand
before this remarkable
work of art.
The Ghent Altar piece is
considered the most important
work of art history for this
reason, because of the detail.
Centuries of collectors,
aristocracy, generals, kings,
have coveted this work.
Murder, theft,
war are just a few
of the machinations employed to
secure possession of this work.
Why is that?
Is it simply because
of its mastery?
Or is it something else?
Worth noting is that there is
some controversy about exactly
who painted "The Mystic Lamb."
Some say it was painted
by Jan van Eyck.
Others say it was
his brother, Herbert.
Together, though, we have
to assume that both of them
worked on this
extraordinary masterpiece.
It's safe to say that both
had a hand in conceiving
and executing this masterpiece.
They used oil in a
way never seen before.
And the fact of matter
is is that the "Adoration
of the Mystic
Lamb" is considered
to be the most mystical
painting of all time.
I refer to it as sort of like
the Renaissance Beatles-on-"Ed
Sullivan" moment.
Because it not only
showed great masters
like Leonardo and Botticelli
and others what to do,
but also how to do it.
And there was a parade of
these incredible geniuses who
all came to spend
time witnessing
the "Adoration of
the Mystic Lamb"
as well as the entire
Ghent Altar piece.
And so let's dive into this
painting and see what's here,
and try to pull
back the veil on it
and find out-- why is this
considered the greatest
masterpiece and the most
mystical painting of all time?
What was it that Leonardo,
Botticelli, Fra Angelico,
Giotto, among others--
Gustave Dore--
were inspired by when
they saw this masterpiece?
What is here that the
eye doesn't readily
see at first sight, that is
encoded within this painting?
The fact is, as
I said, that this
was the moment that
changed painting forever--
just as I said, like the
Beatles on "Ed Sullivan" changed
rock-and-roll music forever
and sent popular culture off
on a new direction.
Looking at "The
Mystic Lamb" here,
we see this radiant light
manifesting from the lamb.
And to some people,
it's just kind
of an interesting painting,
but to others with eyes to see,
there's so much more here.
So as we take a peek
here, we ask, what was it
that Hitler and
others in particular
sought to discover
in this painting?
Why was this painting number
one on the Nazi checklist
of paintings to be stolen
during World War II?
We know for a fact
that before the war,
Nazi art historians and scholars
had scoured the world's art
museums, certainly
European museums--
the British Museum, the
Louvre, and others--
and they actually made
a checklist of paintings
that they intended to
secure once the Nazis had
taken over Europe.
High on the list,
not top on the list,
was "The Mystic Lamb"
by Jan van Eyck.
So what was it
that Hitler sought?
The answer is Arcanum.
It's open on its hinges
for religious holidays
but remains closed for most
of the year, at which point
only eight of the 20 panels
of the Ghent Altar piece
are visible.
When closed, we see at the top
the prophets and the sigils
predicting the coming
of the Messiah.
Is this what intrigued Hitler?
We know that Hitler fancied
himself as the Nazi Messiah.
Was there something in
this painting, perhaps,
that might have,
in Hitler's mind,
been able to assist him in his
quest for global domination,
but also Nazi Messiah-ship?
Here we see the
prophets and the sibyls
with the prophecy of the
coming of the Messiah.
Below is the event
that they prophesied.
We see the Archangel
Gabriel announcing to Mary
that she will soon
conceive the Christ child.
On the left is the
Archangel Gabriel,
also with her peacock wings,
holding the lily in her hand.
And on the right, we
see the Virgin Mary
receiving the dove
of the Holy Spirit
with a rainbow enfolding
the dove's head.
And then in between is
where we see a cityscape.
Want to offer a
special thanks here
to the "Closer to Van
Eyck" project, which
is a very valuable
study resource.
This website
presents the results
from the Lasting
Support, which is
an interdisciplinary
research project devoted
to maintaining the
Ghent Altar piece.
Commissioned by the
Churchwardens of St. Bavo's
Cathedral in Ghent, Belgium, and
at the initiative of the Getty
Foundation, the main sponsor
of the Lasting Support,
the project's findings
were made available
to the public in 2012, along
with breathtaking images
of the painting.
It's fair to say that the Ghent
Altar piece and "The Mystic
Lamb" is the single most studied
painting in the world, as well.
As I mentioned, in between
Archangel Gabriel and Mary,
we see this cityscape
with extraordinary detail.
And beside it, what do
we see but the symbol
of the Chintamani,
the triple-dot symbol.
Now that tells us we're
on the right path here.
This tells us that we're
on the path of Arcanum.
And it must be that Van
Eyck was clueing us in
to look for his
alchemical secrets here.
So in the detail here,
we see, once again,
Gabriel wearing
her jeweled crown.
She's got her jewel
at her heart chakra.
We see her holding the lily.
And then look at this
just magnificent detail
here, provided by
the Getty Foundation.
It's absolutely extraordinary.
And the thing is is that
when you visit that website,
you can go into microscopic
detail on this painting,
perhaps a detail never before
seen until Jan or Herbert Van
Eyck envisioned this painting
in their own minds' eye.
Look at Mary here, solemn,
in this sacred pose,
that jewel once again indicating
her heart chakra as well
as her crown chakra.
And then we see the descent
of this magnificent dove,
symbolizing the descent
of the Holy Spirit,
this holy cosmic vibration,
also with the rainbow encircling
the dove's head.
This is the moment when this
powerful sacred vibration
enters into the
consciousness of Mary,
and she is then transformed
into the Christ-bearer.
We see the open book beside
her-- the Book of Arcanum,
assuredly.
Look at the crown
of the Virgin here.
We see the jewels on the crown.
We see the 12 stars on her head.
This is absolutely
mind-boggling in the detail
and also in its
symbolism, as well.
And again, put yourself
in the position
of a Botticelli or a Leonardo.
You're just beginning
your career.
You make the pilgrimage
to St. Bavo's in Ghent
and you stand before this
magnificent masterpiece.
And you wonder,
how can I top this?
It's like any
rock-and-roll singer
who says, how can
you top the Beatles?
How can you top
Lennon-McCartney?
Actually, these artists
take it is a challenge.
They're empowered
now because of what
Van Eyck has given to them.
Again, not only showing
them what to do,
but also how to do it.
In the background here,
we see Mary Magdalene
holding the alabaster jar.
She's hidden.
She's concealed.
She's a spectator, in a
way, of these proceedings,
hinting at the feminine
mysteries of the Magdalene
and the power of
that alabaster jar.
Its contents, of course,
contained the sacred oil
that she used to anoint Jesus
just before his Resurrection.
And it's possible,
as the Gnostics say,
that it is the oil
within this jar that
dissolved Jesus' body into
light, that enabled him
to manifest his
Resurrection body.
Now here's a key
to this painting.
It fits in with what we've
heard from so many other artists
in our Arcanum series.
And that is that Van Eyck
intended this painting
to be a meditative aid.
He did this by inserting
clever cross references
between the items in the
painting and the Mass
in which it was opened.
For instance, a towel similar
to the one worn by the altar
boys at the Mass is
painted in a niche.
This links the events
of the painting
with the Mass being performed.
Here's the idea.
You are here.
You are not a viewer
of this painting.
You're not a spectator.
Van Eyck intended you to be a
participant in this painting.
It is a meditative aid.
We are to embrace this
painting, to contemplate on it,
meditate on it,
and reflect on it,
and participate in this
extraordinary proceeding, where
we see this gathering of saints
and wise men and wizards,
gathering around
the Mystic Lamb.
We are here in this
painting at this moment.
Van Eyck is directly
linking us at this moment
to what is transpiring in
this extraordinary scene.
We see a procession of saints
moving towards the Lamb
on an altar at the center
of this mystical field.
Look at the white
specks on the ground.
Is that manna, the food of
the gods, the star food that
fed the light bodies
of the Israelites?
Remember, as the Israelites are
wandering in the wilderness,
suddenly comes
these white flakes
that appear on the
ground in the morning.
And the Israelites
eat this manna,
and it fed them
for over 40 years
during their wanderings
in the wilderness.
So perhaps that's what Van
Eyck is intending here,
is to see the manna
on the ground.
And if we're participating
in the painting,
we're reaching out
and feeling ourselves
ingesting this sacred star food.
As we see the beams
of light coming down,
we realize that we're
now being anointed
by the rays coming
from the cosmic dove.
We are amongst the
saints and the druids
and the wise men
who are congregating
in this extraordinary
scene, who are congregating
around the Mystic
Lamb on the red altar.
We see a circle of angels,
a circle of star beings,
in fact, who are gathered
around this mystical altar.
The Lamb is shedding
blood from its chest
as it's being poured into
the Holy Grail sitting
on the altar.
Another angel holds a cross.
Another angel holds a spear.
It appears to me that they
might be bringing a kit of tools
together.
Hm, that's a very
powerful speculation
we'll come back to
here in a moment.
Here in the detail, we see the
Mystic Lamb, the radiant Lamb,
spilling its blood into the cup.
And we're asked to consider
that this is actually
a symbol of Christ, the
pure Lamb, the Lamb of God.
But it may be something
else, as well.
There's no sunlight in
this mystical setting.
Rather, the light of the Holy
Spirit descends like a dove
and illuminates the scene
with this divine glow.
We see this spray
of light coming
from this otherworldly source,
from the dove, radiating
into this mystical field
but also reaching out
into our field as
well, our energy field.
And we're being encouraged
here by Van Eyck
to reach out and catch rays
from this mystical light source.
What we see here is reflected
in the Gospel of John,
where it says, "I saw
the spirit descending
from heaven like a dove."
So in fact, Van Eyck is bathing
us in the spirit of the dove,
or the Holy Spirit.
So feel this painting
just for a moment.
Connect with this divine
light radiating from the dove.
And place yourself here
and ask the question,
what exactly is
happening at this moment?
What is this circle
of star beings
gathered together to accomplish?
What is it that
maybe Hitler would
have seen as he's
looking at this painting?
Why did they covet this
painting so desperately?
What information might be
coded in this painting that
would have prompted the Nazis
to go to extraordinary lengths
to get a hold of this painting?
Again, in the detail,
we see the dove,
we see the radiant light
coming from the dove,
and the spray of light all
around this mystic field.
And amplifying the
detail here, now
perhaps, we're opening
our own energy field,
and we're feeling
this holy light
coming into our energy field.
Here's a key insight
into this painting.
Not only is it a meditative
aid and we're a participant,
but actually, what
Van Eyck is showing
us is that this scene takes
place at the throne of God.
Folks, this means
that this scene is not
taking place on Earth.
What Van Eyck is imagining for
us is an otherworldly location,
and not just like any
otherworldly location--
the throne of God,
Sion, as talked
about in the book of Hebrews,
the home of the just humans
made perfect as well as angelic
beings called the Watchers.
The aim of all
Judeo-Christian civilization
is to connect with Sion and to
join all the angels gathered
in joyful assembly
and the just humans
made perfect-- meaning
whole, holy, and complete.
We know that this is the
throne of God because
of the presence of the fountain
of life before the altar.
What Van Eyck has done is
something quite clever.
Around the octagonal pedestal
upon which the fountain sits
is inscribed, "This
is the fountain
of the water of life flowing
from the throne of God
and the Lamb."
This is a statement from the
Book of Revelation chapter
20, verse 1 and is a
description of Sion,
the location of God's throne.
So look at the detail
here, unimaginable
before the innovation
of oil painting.
We see the water dripping
from this fountain.
We've got an angel
up on top and we've
got this octagonal pedestal
that's filled with water.
Not only that, but as we look
at the base of the pedestal,
we see actually-- I apologize.
I'm going to go back here.
We see water flowing
from a gargoyle
at the base of the pedestal.
This water is
literally now spilling
into the room around you
in Van Eyck's imagination,
and you are connecting with the
fountain of the water of life.
That's none less than the
fountain of immortality.
Because if we can drink
from these waters,
we will become immortal beings.
The book of Hebrews
says that, "You
have come to Sion,
to the Heavenly
Jerusalem, the city
of the living God.
You have come to
thousands upon thousands
of angels in joyful assembly."
This is the
otherworldly location
that Van Eyck is imagining
for us in this painting
and rendering for us
in our imaginations.
Again, it informs us
that we are not on Earth.
We are at the center
of the cosmos.
We are at the source
place of our souls,
according to
Judeo-Christian culture.
We are in not only Sion,
we are also in Eden itself,
our place of origin.
And we are connecting
with the fountain
of the waters of life,
the waters of immortality.
Because again, from the
octagonal stone basin
rises this brass column that's
surmounted by this angel.
This is actually the angel
referred to in Revelation 22:1,
where it says, "The angel showed
me the river of water of life,
as clear as a crystal,
flowing from the throne of God
and of the Lamb down the
middle of the great street
of the city.
On each side of the river
stood the tree of life,
bearing 12 crops of
fruit, yielding its fruit
for every month."
This is the angel of Revelation
presented to us by Jan van
Eyck.
The water flows in jets from
two vases borne by the angel
and from gargoyles or dragons
attached to the column.
And here in the
detail, once again, we
see the gargoyle
with the open mouth,
with the water of life spilling
into the room around us.
This is before
television, remember,
when the imagination was fed
by paintings such as this.
And individuals had never seen
anything like this before.
And so here they
are being prepped,
understanding that this
is a meditative aid,
that they are in fact
participating in this scene.
And without outside influences,
such as TV and just the flood
of images that we have on
a daily basis in our minds,
the participants would
stand before this
and activate the power
of their imagination,
and feel that water
spilling all around them.
You can just imagine the
room literally flooding
maybe it's ankle-deep.
Maybe it's deeper.
And they are wading
through these sacred waters
as they adore the Mystic Lamb.
Perhaps you can feel it now
in your own energy field.
Allegedly-- and here's
the key to the painting,
in my view-- Adolf Hitler was
convinced that "The Mystic
Lamb" contained a
coded map identifying
the location of the lost Arma
Christi, the instruments or kit
of Christ's Passion
and crucifixion.
Hitler, again, fancied himself
as a Nazi Messiah, an Aryan
Messiah.
And he thought that if he could
get a hold of the various tools
and implements connected with
the crucifixion of Jesus,
that he would receive the power
of those tools and implements
and it would aid
him in his quest
to become the Nazi Messiah.
In Christian end time art,
this kit I'm referring to
is called that Etimasia, or the
throne of the Second Coming,
the instruments of the Passion.
It's most often composed
of the cross, which
is known to mystics and
purveyors of the Arcanum
as an instrument
of transmutation.
It's not an
instrument of torture
as thought of by
traditional Christianity.
Rather, it's an instrument
of transmutation
that converts flesh or mass
into light, spirit, or energy.
In Christian art, Christ is
represented as the central stem
of the tree of life,
which is also the cross.
The cross, of course,
was made from wood
that is thought to
have originally grown
in the Garden of Eden.
In our "Philosopher's
Stone" episode,
we talked about the rod
or wand utilized by Jesus.
That is believed in
Christian tradition
to be a branch that grew
from the tree of life.
So that wand is actually sort
of like the remote control
to the computer, if you will.
It's a piece of the greater
whole that in fact operates it.
The second tool or implement
that's part of the Etimasia
is a spear that pierced
the side of Christ.
This is the Spear of Destiny.
Many occult Nazi
researchers know
that Adolf Hitler was
obsessed with acquiring
the Spear of Destiny.
And they want you to believe
that it's a simple Roman
centurion's spear that was
used to poke the side of Christ
as he stood upon the cross.
The legend has it that he who
acquired the Spear of Destiny
would rule the world.
Now I have to tell you,
that's a wonderful story,
that that centurion's spear is a
simple Roman centurion's spear,
and that it was actually housed
in the Habsburg treasure room,
as lore tells us.
But Adolf Hitler
was many things,
but stupid is not one of them.
He assuredly knew
that when we're
talking about the cross,
the spear, the sponge,
and other items, that we're
talking about something far
more mystical and
profound than most people
have previously ascertained.
And we know for a fact
that Hitler and the Nazi SS
were deeply, deeply steeped
in the lore of the Holy
Grail, Atlantis, and other
of these occult subjects.
And they must have
known what we now know,
that we're talking about
profound mystical tools
or implements that are capable
of manipulating energy--
specifically the
human energy field.
And it is the Arcanum that
transforms an ordinary mortal
into a superhuman being--
primary object of the Nazis'
quest.
Another piece in this kit
of tools or implements
is the scroll or a
book, which at one level
could represent the
Gospels, but also represents
the heavenly tablets of
ancient Sumeria and Egypt,
the Book of Life, the
Book of Seven Seals,
and also the fabled
Book of Love, as well.
Another tool or
implement is the robe
of light, which is called the
perfect garment or the star
body garment.
Additionally, a jar containing
sacred oil is often present.
Later, a crown and other
instruments of the Passion
are added.
So these are the fundamental
pieces of the Etimasia,
the throne of Christ or the
throne of the Second Coming,
or this "ascension kit,"
as I'm describing here.
Here is a 12th
century representation
of this kit of tools, as
found in a church in Rome.
What we see is
the cross attached
to a box or platform, an altar.
We see a cloak of stars.
We see a book.
We see the Spear of Destiny.
We see three nails,
the grail cup.
We see a crown.
All this, guarded by two angels.
Now let's come back
to the Mystic Lamb.
We see the altar, or the box.
We see the cross,
the spear, the crown.
Oh, I see what's happening.
This circle of star
beings or angels
is actually gathering the
tools or implements utilized
in the manifestation of the
light body or Resurrection
body of Christ.
These are all the
tools or implements
that are to be rediscovered at
the time of the Second Coming,
or what is called Judgment Day.
I've written a book called "The
Judgment Day Device" about all
of these tools or implements
and their function,
and where they might be located.
Here's a Russian
example of the Etimasia.
We see the altar, the book, the
cross, the spear-- the tools
or implements all come together.
This is what is thought of as
the complete cross of Christ.
Investigators realized
that a crucifix by itself
is not the cross of crucifixion.
The cross of crucifixion is
this complete set of tools.
And assuredly, Hitler
knew that, as well.
The complete set is the spear,
the cross, the platform,
and also the star
cloak, which we're
going to talk about in
detail momentarily, as well
as the book.
In Transfiguration
images, Jesus is
portrayed wearing a bright
white garment of light in front
of an open gate, sometimes
filled with stars
and composed of various
geometric shapes,
such as the
almond-shaped mandorlas,
or vesica piscis,
filled with stars.
And in my view, what he's
done in the Transfiguration
is put on this cloak or
garment and opened a stargate.
I say this to say because
ultimately, what Hitler
was seeking through
"The Mystic Lamb" was
the secrets of transfiguration
or metamorphosis--
how to transform an ordinary
human into a superhuman being.
Now whether he intended to
utilize this immense power
of these tools or
implements for himself,
personally and
exclusively for himself,
or two aid in his quest to
create the super or master
race, is unknown.
But assuredly, the
Nazi researchers
knew that this is what
they were seeking,
was the secret of
human transmutation
or transfiguration,
and that's what's
encoded in "The Mystic Lamb."
"Blessed are those who
wash their robes, that they
may have the right
to the tree of life
and may go through the
gates into the city."
The Bible is absolutely
clear that in order
to enter the celestial Sion,
we have to transmute our flesh.
The Bible is clear, as well,
that flesh and blood cannot
inherit the kingdom of heaven.
This is absolute,
direct evidence
that we must in fact transmute
our body into light or energy
preparatory to going
through that gate
in order to dwell in
the celestial realms.
Now I want to talk for a
moment about the platform
upon which the cross sits.
Because what we realize is
that ark or platform is in fact
the Ark of the Covenant, the Old
Testament device that was made,
identified, by Moses at
the base of Mount Sinai.
Now most researchers,
when they show you
the Ark of the Covenant will
show you a simple golden box,
such as this here
portrayed in James Tissot's
wonderful painting.
But actually, guys, this
isn't the complete Ark
of the Covenant.
This is just part of the ark.
This is just the box.
The complete Ark
of the Covenant,
according to the book of
Exodus, includes the Rod
of Enlightenment,
the rod of Aaron,
whose name means enlightenment.
It includes the flask
of manna, the cruse
of anointing oil, as well as the
stone tablets, which I believe
are the Chintamani, or
the Philosopher's Stone.
This is the complete Ark of the
Covenant kit, fully assembled.
This is also the
complete cross of Christ.
It's also the throne
of the Second Coming.
Oh, I get it.
The complete Ark of the
Covenant and the complete cross
of Christ are the same thing.
That's a revelation.
And this is something
that Hitler and the Nazis,
as well as the American
authorities, must have known.
What do you do
once you have fully
assembled this
complete kit of tools?
The star cloak, the ark, the
cross, the book, the spear,
the cup?
Well of course,
you open a portal.
You bring in the Christ being,
the star being, the Christ
energy.
Why does Christ need a
kit of tools like this?
As I look at this,
the answer comes
from the Book of Revelation,
where John the Revelator
saw the Ark of the Covenant
at the throne of Christ.
What that tells me is
that there's at least two
of these devices.
There's one on Earth and
one in the heavenly realms.
And they must be connected.
And it suggests to me this idea.
This is my
interpretation on this.
That is-- Christ and
these avatar-type beings
are super-high-frequency
fast-moving beings.
And in order to manifest
on the Earth plane,
it appears that they must
step down their frequency.
And
I believe that that's what the
Ark of the Covenant throne kit,
or ascension kit of Christ, is.
We know for a fact,
based on the statements
in the Book of Exodus, that
Yahweh, the Old Testament God,
used the Ark of the
Covenant as his throne.
Yahweh manifested as
a humanoid luminous--
in fact, rainbow-like being
on the ark throne, which
functioned as his footstool.
It appears to me that
Jesus utilized it
for the opposite purpose.
He used it in order to
not enter this realm,
but to exit this realm.
And when Christ returns
at the Second Coming,
it appears, at least according
to Christian tradition,
that this kit of tools
must be reassembled.
So who does that?
Well, the answer is
in the time of Jesus,
it was his brother James who
was responsible for this.
James was part of a long line
of figures called rainmakers
who assembled this kit of
tools, disassembled it, and then
reassembled it at various
times throughout history.
And undoubtedly James
or one of the rainmakers
will reappear at the time
the Second Coming in order
to reassemble this kit of tools.
Why are they called rainmakers?
Well the answer is
is because Christ
and these other
ascended beings ride
through the cosmos on clouds.
And clouds bring rain.
Hence the pun-- they who know
the secrets of this device
are the rainmakers.
And so here we see the Ark
of the Covenant producing
this mystic cloud called the
Shekhinah, the Divine Glory,
which is the throne upon
which Yahweh manifests.
At Saint-Denis, outside
Paris in France,
I took this photo that
shows the complete cross
and a complete Ark
of the Covenant.
Here's the ark,
here's the cross,
and the other
tools or implements
are included within
the golden box.
In this example, the
angels are on either side.
We see the ark
with the footstool.
We see the flask of
manna, the cross attached.
That's the complete
Ark of the Covenant.
cross of Christ.
Hitler knew it.
Absolutely knew it.
And he furthermore believed that
"The Mystic Lamb" by Jan Van
Eyck would tell him the actual
location of these various tools
or implements so that he could
put this whole kit together
and assist him in his quest
to be the Nazi Messiah.
So here we see the footstool,
the flask of manna.
There's our cloak, the book.
Going back one slide,
the cross is attached.
We have the complete
Ark of the Covenant,
the complete cross of Christ.
They're the same thing.
Here's an example
where we see the angels
with the cross attached, the
book, the cloak, the footstool.
That's the ark.
That's the cross.
It's called the Etimasia, or
the throne of the Second Coming.
And another couple examples--
then we'll get back to "The
Mystic Lamb"-- where we see
the complete kit of tools,
with Christ riding above
in the so-called cloud,
but which we readily identify as
in fact a portal or a gateway.
Is this device in fact some
kind of a stargate device?
I believe that's
exactly what it is,
and I derive that just from
the function of these tools
or implements.
And here's Mary, reading up.
She's sitting on
what appears to be
some kind of a platform,
which is actually probably
the Ark of the Covenant
with the cross attached
and all the other various
tools or implements.
It was actually this painting
that inspired my thinking
that the ark and the complete
kit of ascension tools
is formulated or created
in our consciousness.
Shown here is an image
of the Arma Christi
from a 14th century book
shelved in the Royal
Collection of the
British Library.
It's divided into a series of
38 compartments, each of which
depicts images of the
instruments of the Passion,
or the Arma Christi, or
some other object or event
emblematic of the Passion.
We see the hammer, the
cock that crew three times,
the dice, the pelican, the wound
in Christ's side, and so forth.
And the text that
accompanies it declares
that whoever recites the
prayer "Ave facies praeclara"
and looks at the image
with devotion, intensity,
meditation, contemplation, will
receive an indulgence of three
years and may experience a
beatific vision of Christ
in which the glory pours
down upon the meditater.
The creator of this
image map-- or mind
map, as I term it--
apparently believed
that connecting the dots
of these symbols in one's
consciousness could
result in the sudden burst
or shower of cosmic
energy or light,
a baptism in the
glory of the Lord,
the ultimate a-ha experience.
And with that, a-ha!
I got it.
That's what these
painters are all about.
They're trying to create
meditative aids whereby
you connect the dots and are
able to then shower yourself
with this glory or
this powerful energy.
That's what we see in
all these paintings.
And Hitler then
believed that possession
of the Arma Christi within
would grant their owner
supernatural capabilities.
It was also, of course, known to
American authorities, as well.
You've heard of "Men
Who Stare at Goats"?
How about men who stare at
paintings, who contemplate,
meditate, and reflect
on these images
and connect the dots
in their consciousness,
and are then able to trigger
this internal activation
of their own consciousness?
I mean, forget about
looking for the Ark
of the Covenant in Ethiopia
or the US capital or all
these other places
people think it is.
It's within us.
We have to learn to connect
the dots within ourselves
and activate our
consciousness ourselves.
That's the message of
Arcanum and the message
of all these great painters.
Now, is there actual
devices out here?
That's still a very
real possibility.
Because humans always
want to duplicate
the natural capabilities of the
body with technology out here.
And in particular, a panel
called the "Just Judges,"
or the "Righteous
Judges," is thought
to conceal the location of
the actual physical tools
or implements of
the Arma Christi.
Hubert van Eyck painted himself
and Jan Van Eyck in a panel
together with the just judges,
these righteous judges.
He did this because this
panel contained a crucial key
to solving the location
of the Arma Christi.
And so here we see
the Van Eyck brothers
having painted themselves into
this painting as participants
and, I think, sending people
actually off on a wild goose
chase, looking all over
Europe for these tools
or implements everywhere but
where they're actually located,
which is within.
The trouble is, this
panel was stolen in 1934
and never recovered.
There is, however,
a copy in existence.
Also stolen is the Saint
John the Baptist panel,
showing John holding
the Mystic Lamb.
The panel was removed
from the frame, apparently
with care, leaving the
other panels undamaged.
And so here's a photograph
from the day it was stolen,
where we see the
empty panel here.
We see "The Mystic
Lamb" over here.
What happened is that an
investigation unfolded.
In the empty space was left
a note, written in French,
with the words, "Taken
from Germany by the Treaty
of Versaille," a
reference to the fact
that the Altar piece had
been returned to Ghent only
a decade earlier after
having been moved
to Berlin during World
War I. A photograph
of the missing original
"Just Judges" panel
was fortunately
taken, and a painter
was able to replace the original
in 1945 when he made a copy.
It was the Belgian
copyist Jeff Vanderveken
who actually did that.
The theft of this
national treasure
rocked the country
of Belgium, which
was already in a deep crisis.
The Depression in America
had made its way to Belgium.
Banks closed.
Their king died mysteriously.
And Hitler was coming.
And this was just a real shock
to their national psyche.
At that same time,
the country was
flooded with apparitions
of the Virgin Mary.
Mysticism was in the air.
The Bishop of Ghent then
received a ransom demand
for one million Belgian
francs for the missing panel.
The thief, as a
gesture of good faith,
returned the "John
the Baptist" panel.
And 11 ransom letters
later, Belgian authorities
were unable to recover
the missing panel.
On November 25, 1934, the
thief, Arsene Goedertier,
revealed on his deathbed
that he was the only one who
knew where the
masterpiece was hidden
and that he would take
the secret to his grave.
Goedertier told his
lawyer, Georges de Vos,
that "I alone know where
'The Mystic Lamb' is.
The information is in the drawer
on the right of my writing
table in an envelope marked,
'mutualite.'" De Vos found
carbon copies of the ransom
notes and an unsent note that
said, "It rests in a place where
neither I nor anybody else can
take it away without arousing
the attention of the public."
So did Goedertier learn the
secret of the Mystic Lamb?
Where is the Arma Christi,
these tools or implements?
Well, as I've said
here, in my view,
I believe that what
Van Eyck was intending
was to create a
meditative aid where
we learn to connect the
dots within ourselves
and experience this
shower of radiant light
within our own
consciousness-- and that
is the Arcanum of
"The Mystic Lamb."
And now in Clare's
segment, "Beyond the Veil,"
she's going to take us
deeper into the mysteries
of "The Mystic Lamb," with a
special emphasis on the Golden
Fleece.
>>CLARE: A mystic painting,
secret relics of Jesus,
Nazis, unsolved theft--
this story has it all.
But the bit I like most
is the Van Eyck brothers
intended this painting
to be a meditative aid.
He meant for us to insert
ourselves into the painting
and to participate in the
hunt for the Arma Christi.
Jan Van Eyck was paid to do
this work by Philip the Good.
The mastermind behind
it was unknown.
Van Eyck was a favorite of King
Philip the Good, king of France
and founder of the Order
of the Golden Fleece.
In this portrait by
Rogier van der Weyden,
Philip is shown here wearing
the chain, or the order,
and a ring that appears to
bear the three-ring Chintamani
symbol.
The choice of the Golden
Fleece of the Georgian kingdom
of Colchis as the symbol
of a Christian order
caused some controversy.
The Bishop of Chalon,
chancellor of the order,
identified it instead
with the fleece of Gideon
that received the dew of heaven.
This is a reference to
the philosophical dew,
an alchemical
substance that emanates
from the center of
the galaxy and is
transmitted through the sun.
To the Israelites,
this manna from heaven
was a celestial food.
This dew, says the
Zohar, is the manna
on which the souls of the
just nourish themselves.
The Chosen hunger
for it and collect it
with full hands in
the fields of heaven.
Around 1546, Cosimo
de Medici was
awarded the Order of
the Golden Fleece.
He is shown with the collar of
the Order of the Golden Fleece
in "Apotheosis of Cosimo."
Apotheosis means to deify, to
raise from a man to a god-man.
It is the secret of Arcanum.
An angel crowns Cosimo
with an oak wreath.
Another angel holds the collar
of the Order of the Golden
Fleece.
In Greek mythology,
the Golden Fleece
is the fleece of the
gold hare or winged ram.
It just a symbol of
authority and sovereignty
and plays a central role in
the story of the hero Jason
and the Argonauts.
Here we see Jason about
to seize the Golden
Fleece with the stern of
the Argo at the right.
Jason led the Argonauts,
a band of adventurers
who set on on the ship Argo to
steal the magical golden fleece
of the ram, which was preserved
in Colchis on the Black Sea.
With the help of the gods
and the sorceress Medea,
Jason was able to
take the fleece
from a grove
protected by a dragon.
Here with Athena beside him,
he reaches for the fleece.
On the Douris cup,
Athena is shown
wearing her goat-skin aegis
bearing the Gorgon and a helmet
bearing a winged lioness, and
is holding an owl and her spear.
The Golden Fleece
hangs in a tree.
Jason is being regurgitated by
the dragon guarding the tree.
Peleus sent Jason to retrieve
the magical fleece of gold that
had been created
by Hermes and kept
in the grove of
Ares, the god of war,
in the far-off land of Colchis.
The hero Jason and
fellow Argnoauts
battled the guardian dragon
of the Golden Fleece.
The serpent is coiled
around the sacred tree
from which the fleece hangs.
Athena wears this golden garment
in this incredible statue
of her at the Parthenon
in Nashville, Tennessee.
In 1482, the Medici
family commissioned
Sandro Botticelli's painting,
"Pallas and the Centaur."
Athena wears a transparent gown
studded with diamonds, symbolic
of the light body
or diamond body.
Is the light body
the Golden Fleece
sought by Jason
and other heroes?
Is it the light body
or star cloak of Jesus?
Alchemists tell a fascinating
story about Athena and manna
that will be helpful
to decode this Arcanum.
In the story, Zeus
had a headache.
Vulcan, the god of alchemy,
seeking to free Zeus
from his headaches, smashes
his head with an axe.
This releases Pallas Athena,
the goddess of wisdom,
from his skull.
Golden rain, manna,
falls upon her.
Is this mystical manna substance
the fleece of the Mystic Lamb?
Manna is a celestial
substance with a list
of supernatural qualities.
The immortal Melchizadek
gave it to Abraham,
the patriarch of Judaism,
Christianity, and Islam.
Moses conducted it from heaven
with his magic Arcanum staff.
The Israelites collected
it once it hit the ground.
In John 6, Jesus describes
himself as the bread of life.
Starting in verse 27,
he tells his listeners
not to labor for
food which perishes,
but for the food which endures
to everlasting life, which
the son of man will give to you.
In verse 47 to 48 is
written, "Most assuredly I
say to you, he who believes
in me has everlasting life.
I am the bread of life."
Verse 50 to 51 is written, "This
is the bread which comes down
from heaven that one may
eat of it and not die.
I am the living bread which
came down from heaven.
If anyone eats of this
bread, he will live forever."
Manna is clearly a
cosmic substance.
In "Earth Under Fire,"
astrophysicist Dr. Paul
LaViolette proposes that Zeus
signifies the galactic core.
Now that's very interesting.
Athena, who springs from
Zeus's head, he says,
signifies the outburst of
cosmic rays violently emitted
from the galactic center
during a starburst event.
Carried by galactic
winds, these rays
pour through the sun
on their way to Earth.
They bring organic
substances from the galaxy.
The Metropolitan
Museum of Art is
home to Biagio
D'Antonio's "Scenes
From the Story of
the Argonauts."
At the left, Jason is
charged by King Peleus
to retrieve the Golden Fleece.
Jason then mounts his horse
and consults the centaur
Chiron on Mount Peleum, together
with Hercules and Orpheus.
In the distance is
Jason's ship, Argo.
In the second panel, King
Aetes and his daughters
Medea and Cassiopeia meet
Jason and his companions.
At center, Jason plows
the grove of Ares
where the Golden Fleece is
guarded while Orpheus lulls
the dragon to sleep so that
Jason may steal the fleece.
The Golden Fleece
hanging from the tree
is strikingly similar to
the golden nebri of Osiris,
discovered in 1922 in
the tomb of Tutunkhamun.
This calf skin or panther
skin hanging on a pole
is a symbol of
Osiris' resurrection.
The inwat or nebri
was sometimes thought
of as a skin into which the
dismembered limbs of Osiris
were placed by the god
Anubis and were re-membered
in a kind of rebirth,
the cow being
a typical maternal symbol
in Egyptian thought.
The resurrected or
re-membered Osiris
is shown in his bright
white karassed garment.
This means the two symbols-- the
garment of light and the nebri
-- are linked.
William proposes
the karassed garment
is the same as
the Golden Fleece.
This symbol is found in scenes
showing the resurrected Osiris.
At Deir el-Bahari on
Luxor's West Bank,
we see this extraordinary
example, only
this time it appears
to quite humorously
have a Wi-Fi symbol at its top.
A related symbol is the
loaf of bread, or manna.
In ancient Egypt, there
are numerous depictions
of enigmatic loaves
being presented to kings.
This celestial food was said to
heighten the pharaoh's powers
of perception,
awareness, and intuition
and was responsible for
an overall transcendence
of personality to
the angelic state.
As discussed in the
"Icons" episodes,
the scenes on the walls were
magically active in two ways.
They were supposed to make
permanent the action shown
being performed.
If the pharaoh offered a
loaf of bread to Osiris,
that loaf of bread
would continue
to be presented so long as
the representation belonged
in this world and in
the world of the gods.
Likewise, if one stood
before a figure of a god
and uttered his name, a
portion of the divine spirit
would animate the stone
and the deity's attention
would be upon the
speaker, upon his actions,
and upon the hidden
thoughts of his heart.
The principle agent of
Osiris's transformation,
says Dr. Charles Muses,
was the divine food
which, like some super royal
jelly could do for bees,
would stimulate
metamorphic neurosecretory
organs in the human
central nervous system
and enable a super-biological
process to take place,
to mature a higher body
that can transcend at death
and is capable of furnishing
a sensorium to perceive
and function in a world
free than the transient
three-dimensional one in which
we are currently confined.
This was the ageless promise
that the ancient Egypt
held forth most explicitly.
All this brings
us to a key point
in ancient Egyptian ethnobotany.
Ingestion of the
sacred material was
designed not to
merely give a high
but to trigger and impel the
metamorphic process leading
to ethergic transmutation of
human nature into apotheosis.
This is the Golden Fleece.
This process was overseen by
cosmic regents, the living
archetypes of stellar powers.
To attain the awareness of
these star powers or beings
is the goal of Arcanum.
As Muses points out,
we see three rays
or beams of star
power energy entering
the forehead of
the pupil Osiris.
In Egypt, the
etherical quintessence
was represented in the form
of the five-pointed spar.
The word "spar" or
"star" also means door,
and with the
determinative for walking,
it meant passing through
a star door, said Muses.
How about a stargate?
This is the Golden Fleece.
>>WILLIAM: I'm William Henry.
Thank you for
watching "Arcanum."
>>CLARE: And I'm Clare Henry.
See you next time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]